---
date: 2024-09-14
categories:
    - Technical
---

# Let The Computer Wire your Keyboard

Algorithms route trains. They route traces in PCB Design programs. In some cases they route car traffic, and your network traffic is definitely routed by algorithms. _Why don't we make them route keyboard wiring too?_

Obviously, without some robotic attachments, a computer can't solder or physically wire a keyboard. But it certainly can automate the design of wiring nests!

<!-- more -->

## A Simple Appoach

One of the things that stand out most prominently when you look at a wiring diagram like the one at the top of this post is that the wires are, for the most part, straight. The most the wire bends between keys is, let's say, 20 degrees. Here's a simple algorithm that uses this fact:

<div class="algorithm" markdown>
1. Put all the keys in a queue ordered from top key to bottom key (by their Y coordinate).
2. Pick and remove the first key from the queue. If there are no keys in the queue, stop.
3. Set the direction of travel to be to the key's side. Travel left for the left half of the keyboard and right for the right half. If the key is slightly rotated the direction of travel will be rotated that same amount.
4. Examine all keys that are within 20 degrees of the current key. If there are any, put the closest key at the start of the queue and repeat from step 2, continuing to add keys to the same row.
5. If there are no keys within 20 degrees, start a new row and repeat from step 2.
</div>

This algorithm will determine the row wires travelling horizontally across the keyboard. It applies for the column wires too, but you'll need to rotate your worldview 90°. Up/down becomes right/left and vice versa.

For matrices with little to no bending, this works great.

For ones with significant bending, it struggles.

Don't dare trying this with thumb clusters. It fails miserably.

## An Optimization Problem

The simple approach struggles because it's incapable of designing any layout where the wire bends more than 20 degrees. It's a good rule in general, but sometimes the computer needs to understand when it can break that rule. This brings me to the next section of this wiring adventure. What if the computer checked every possible wiring job? How would we determine which is the best? How do you store and represent all these layouts?

### The Price is Right

We can say a few things about a good wiring job.

1. It uses the bare minimum number of pins on the microcontroller. Every row and column uses a pin, so it should minimize _rows + columns_.
2. It doesn't waste wire. Minimizing the total length of wire used would be a good idea.
3. It makes sense. This one is harder to quantify so I'll leave it out for now.

One way to go about choosing an optimal wiring pattern is to constrain the number of pins and minimize the number of keys. If there are 20 keys, a 4x5 matrix would make sense. It fits all 20 keys perfectly into a 4 row x 5 column grid and uses only 9 pins. 3x7 (10 pins) or 2x10 (12 pins) might also make sense. 4x6 might also make sense if the keys are positioned all over the place and we'd like to conserve some wire at the expense of using an extra pin. All in all it really depends on how the keys are laid out. A 100x100 grid (200 pins!), however, would make no sense.

With the grid size fixed, we can go about arranging keys into the grid in such a way that minimizes the amount of wire. If you have some background in optimization, the wire length will be the _cost_.

### State Space

One way to represent a $p \times q$ grid is to use a $pq$-size list. To each of these spots is assigned either one of $n$ keys $K_1 \dots K_n$ or nothing, $\varnothing$. There are ${}^{pq}P_{n} = (pq)!/(pq - n)!$ ways of doing this, or states. Since the number of keys is usually very close too the number of grid spots, I'll estimate this as $pq$ [factorial](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Factorial).

Trying to look through every one of these states is about as terrible as you can get for algorithmic complexity. Going from 5 to 6 keys will take 6 times as long. Going from 19 to 20 keys will take 20 times as long as however horribly long 19 keys will take! Not many sequences increase fast save for $n^n$ and wacky stuff like [busy beavers](https://www.quantamagazine.org/amateur-mathematicians-find-fifth-busy-beaver-turing-machine-20240702/). Rather than searching every $(pq)!$ state we'll search a little more carefully.

## Branch and Bound

One way to reduce the number of states searched is to use the [Branch and Bound](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Branch_and_bound) algorithm. It works great with optimization problems where the states are _discrete_ (we're working with a finite number of possible states instead of a continuum) and it's possible to bound the cost of a subset of states. The key change I'll make between the branch and bound method and the search-everything method is that we'll also examine partial states where only some $m$ keys ($0 \le m < n$) have been assigned along the way. Let's say we're looking through the states and the best solution found so far has cost 100. If a partial state is bounded such that no matter how it's filled in the cost will always be at least 200, it's not worth considering it or any state with those $m$ keys assigned the same way.

The bound for this problem takes advantage of the fact that to create a fully finished grid, every key needs to be connected to its neighbors. Let $c_{ij}\;i \le j < n$ be the distance between keys $i$ and $j$. What we are doing is selecting a subset of these $c_{ij}$ without replacement, for however many connections are needed to make a full grid. If a key and its neighbor have already been assigned, then the length of the wire between them gets added to the cost. If not, claim the smallest of the unused $c_{ij}$ and add it to the cost. Because the cost is the sum of chosen $c_{ij}$, the bound is provably the lower bound on the cost of all full states extrapolated form this partial state.

The branch and bound algorithm goes something like this:

<div class="algorithm" markdown>
1. Pick an initial solution for the problem using the simple approach described above. This solution's cost is the best one found so far.
2. Begin with a queue of just the empty state (the partial state where no keys are assigned to the grid).
3. Pick and remove the first state from the queue. If there are no states in the queue, stop and return the best state found.
4. If this state is a complete state, compute its cost. If its cost is smaller than the best solution's cost, then this state is the best solution.
5. Otherwise if it is a partial state, compute its lower bound. If the lower bound is smaller than the best solution's cost, then iterate through all keys not yet placed in the grid. Find the next unused spot in the grid and assign the key there. Add this new state to the queue.
</div>

We're guaranteed to pick the optimal state, but the efficiency of this algorithm depends on how good of a job the bound does.
