---
date: 2024-03-01
slug: how-cosmos-works
categories:
    - Technical
---

# How Cosmos Works, Draft 1

This is my first pass at describing all the algorithms behind the curtain. Cosmos draws on some ideas from computational geometry, physics, and a lot of mathematical number-crunching. If you ever wondered how the generator is so flexible, come see inside!

<!-- more -->

## Placing Keys in 3D Space

_For more information, see the [Expert Mode > How Keys Are Positioned](../../docs/expert.md#how-keys-are-positioned)._

Keys are laid out using two curves. The first curve positions the key along the column, and the second curve positions the key across the row. The thumb cluster is positioned off of the ++m++ key.

If you're using Expert mode to lay out keys, all bets are off. All the keys are simply placed where you instruct them to be.

## Web Generation

The web refers to the mesh connecting every key socket to it's neighbors. You can think of it as filling in the top region inside the walls. To create the web, the key sockets all first need to be placed on a 2D surface.

One easy way to set up this 2D view is to project every point onto the ground (XY plane). However, this appoach loses accuracy as keys become more tilted relative to the ground.

Cosmos avoids pitfalls in the 2D view by projecting in the direction of the tenting angle and capping high curvatures.

In order to build the web, Cosmos runs [Delaunay Triangularization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delaunay_triangulation) over the set of all points on the corners of the key sockets. This is a common and efficient algorithm for turning a set of points into a network of well-proportioned triangles. There is one catch: The key sockest web must avoid entering the key sockets. Luckily, there's a well-reseached extension, [Constrained Delaunay Triangularization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constrained_Delaunay_triangulation), that enables adding constraints to the mesh. Every edge of the key sockets is added as a constraint.

## Improving the Web

earsntieasnt

## Wall Generation

## Microcontroller Placement

## Screw Placement

## Building the Model

Thus far I've described _how things are positoned_. This was a conscious design decision I made when I started designing the generator. Before even creating any sort of model that can be sent to a 3D printer and built, every part of the keyboard is laid out and computed. This allows for steps to easily reference each other; for example, the microcontroller placement needs to know where the walls are.

Ultimately, the model must be turned into geometry that can be rendered and printed. In both 3D printing and computer graphics, models are represented as a mesh of triangles. Some parts of the model, like the web, are already triangular. These transfer 1:1 to the exported model. Other surfaces, such as rounded walls, are not so triangular.

These surfaces are represented as cubic Bezier surfaces. If you've used a vector editing program like Illustrator before, then you may be familiar with the Pen tool, and thus Bezier curves. These are a way of describing a curve through endpoints and a set of control points. Often we use cubic bezier curves, which have two control points.

Bezier surfaces are cubic bezier curves but extended into a second dimension in the same way that a sphere is a circle but in an extra dimension. To transform a bezier surface into triangles, we can subdivide it into very small triangles then appoximate each tiny curved surface as a rectangle.
