README.md, before:

# Cosmos Keyboards

The most adaptable generator for ergonomic mechanical keyboards there is.

<p align="center">
   <a href="https://ryanis.cool/cosmos"><img alt="Cosmos Logo" height="400px" src="static/keyboard2.png" /></a>
</p>

[Cosmos](https://ryanis.cool/cosmos) is released under an open-core model. 95% of the generator is free and open-source. Pro features (rounded edges, the stilts model, and wrist rests) are not.

## Generator

Most generator code lives at [`src/lib`] and[`src/routes/beta`]. Some files used for pre-generating STEP & GLB files used in the generator are located at [`src/model_gen`].

[`src/lib`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib
[`src/routes/beta`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/beta
[`src/model_gen`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/model_gen

To run the generator locally, you'll need to [clone] the repository and [have installed Node.js][nodejs] and [OpenSCAD]. Then run these commands on the command line:

[clone]: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/cloning-a-repository
[nodejs]: https://nodejs.org/en/learn/getting-started/how-to-install-nodejs
[OpenSCAD]: https://openscad.org/downloads.html

```bash
cd Cosmos-Keyboards
npm install
mkdir target
export OPENSCAD=/path/to/openscad # should end in .exe on Windows
make keycaps-simple # Generates keycaps used for collision detection.
make keycaps # Generates geometry for all the keycaps. Take a while.
make # Compiles protobuf files
make parts # Generates the mx switch geometry
npm run dev

# Optional
make keyholes # (requires Java and Leiningen): Generates keyholes used in the Dactyl generator
```

Then visit [`http://localhost:5173/beta`](http://localhost:5173/beta).

If you're using Windows and don't have access to the `make` command, you can piece together the commands that are run by referencing the `Makefile` and running them yourself. Or just [install make](https://stackoverflow.com/a/73862277) :)

### Contributing

I recommend you first follow the steps above to run the generator locally so that you can test your changes. If you're interested in:

- Adding support for new parts (such as a display or trackball)
- Adding a new microcontroller to the generator

Then follow the instructions [in the documentation](https://ryanis.cool/cosmos/docs/contributing) (source is in `docs/docs`) for complete guide on how to do this.

Otherwise if you're looking to change how the generated keyboards look, the three files you'll be interested in are:

- [`src/lib/worker/geometry.ts`]
- [`src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts`]
- [`src/lib/worker/model.ts`]

[`src/lib/worker/geometry.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/geometry.ts
[`src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts
[`src/lib/worker/model.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/model.ts

Rendering in Cosmos is split into two parts: geometrical calculations (which determines where parts go), and modeling operations (building the 3d model in OpenCascade). The files `geometry.ts` and `cachedGeometry.ts` perform those geometrical calculations (with the latter acting as a higher-level wrapper over functions in the former), and `model.ts` is responsible for all 3d modeling operations.

## Hand Scanning

The code is at [`src/routes/scan`](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/scan). Most of the processing happens in [`lib/hand.ts`](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/scan/lib/hand.ts).

Please feel free to use either GitHub or Discord for submitting issues.

### Building your own keyboard app?

I'm planning on building out an API to make it easy for users to share their scanned hand data with other keyboard-related websites. If you maintain a keyboard-related site and are interested in adding a way for visitors to quickly see how your keyboard fits their hand, send me an email at.cool. You can of course use this code to build out your own hand scanning solution, provided you abide by the terms of the [AGPL-3.0 license](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/blob/main/LICENSE).

Commit message:

Build process: Site previews on PRs by making CI scripts work on Vercel (#6)

README.md, after:

# Cosmos Keyboards

The most adaptable generator for ergonomic mechanical keyboards there is.

<p align="center">
   <a href="https://ryanis.cool/cosmos"><img alt="Cosmos Logo" height="400px" src="static/keyboard2.png" /></a>
</p>

[Cosmos](https://ryanis.cool/cosmos) is released under an open-core model. 95% of the generator is free and open-source. Pro features (rounded edges, the stilts model, and wrist rests) are not.

## Generator

Most generator code lives at [`src/lib`] and[`src/routes/beta`]. Some files used for pre-generating STEP & GLB files used in the generator are located at [`src/model_gen`].

[`src/lib`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib
[`src/routes/beta`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/beta
[`src/model_gen`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/model_gen

To run the generator locally, you'll need to [clone] the repository and [have installed Node.js][nodejs] and [OpenSCAD] (if you're on 64-bit Linux, the build process will automatically download OpenSCAD for you). Then run these commands on the command line:

[clone]: https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/cloning-a-repository
[nodejs]: https://nodejs.org/en/learn/getting-started/how-to-install-nodejs
[OpenSCAD]: https://openscad.org/downloads.html

```bash
cd Cosmos-Keyboards
npm install
mkdir target
make # Compiles protobuf files, prompts you to install OpenSCAD
make keycaps-simple # Generates keycaps used for collision detection.
make keycaps # Generates geometry for all the keycaps. Take a while.
make parts # Generates the mx switch geometry
npm run dev

# Optional
make keyholes # (requires Java and Leiningen): Generates keyholes used in the Dactyl generator
```

Then visit [`http://localhost:5173/beta`](http://localhost:5173/beta).

If you're using Windows and don't have access to the `make` command, you can piece together the commands that are run by referencing the `Makefile` and running them yourself. Or just [install make](https://stackoverflow.com/a/73862277) :)

If OpenSCAD is not available for your system or you're having trouble installing it, you can alternatively `make keycaps-simple2 keycaps2`. These experimental scripts use web assembly versions of OpenSCAD and Manifold to render models, but the translation layer I wrote is not 100% accurate so expect inaccuracies.

To generate docs there are a few more commands:

```bash
npm install --include=optional # Make sure optional dependencies are installed
make keyboards # Generates images of keyboards used in the docs.
npm run doc
```

### Contributing

I recommend you first follow the steps above to run the generator locally so that you can test your changes. If you're interested in:

- Adding support for new parts (such as a display or trackball)
- Adding a new microcontroller to the generator

Then follow the instructions [in the documentation](https://ryanis.cool/cosmos/docs/contributing) (source is in `docs/docs`) for complete guide on how to do this.

Otherwise if you're looking to change how the generated keyboards look, the three files you'll be interested in are:

- [`src/lib/worker/geometry.ts`]
- [`src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts`]
- [`src/lib/worker/model.ts`]

[`src/lib/worker/geometry.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/geometry.ts
[`src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/cachedGeometry.ts
[`src/lib/worker/model.ts`]: https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/lib/worker/model.ts

Rendering in Cosmos is split into two parts: geometrical calculations (which determines where parts go), and modeling operations (building the 3d model in OpenCascade). The files `geometry.ts` and `cachedGeometry.ts` perform those geometrical calculations (with the latter acting as a higher-level wrapper over functions in the former), and `model.ts` is responsible for all 3d modeling operations.

## Hand Scanning

The code is at [`src/routes/scan`](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/scan). Most of the processing happens in [`lib/hand.ts`](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/tree/main/src/routes/scan/lib/hand.ts).

Please feel free to use either GitHub or Discord for submitting issues.

### Building your own keyboard app?

I'm planning on building out an API to make it easy for users to share their scanned hand data with other keyboard-related websites. If you maintain a keyboard-related site and are interested in adding a way for visitors to quickly see how your keyboard fits their hand, send me an email at.cool. You can of course use this code to build out your own hand scanning solution, provided you abide by the terms of the [AGPL-3.0 license](https://github.com/rianadon/Cosmos-Keyboards/blob/main/LICENSE).
